the unexpurgated pike report foreword by
philip AG report of the House Select
Committee on Intelligence 1976
publishers note the pike committee
report includes extensive footnotes the
footnotes are too substantial to be both
included here and maintain the
listenable narrative thus the footnotes
were excluded from this audiobook
version interested listeners can find
them in the original PDF version of the
report available on archive.org section
2b performance it is one thing to
conclude that tens of billions of
intelligence dollars have been rather
independently spent and sometimes miss
spent over the past few years the
important issues are whether the
spending sufficiently meets our needs
whether Americans have received their
money's worth and whether non-monetary
costs sometimes outweigh the benefits
the latter question is a matter of risks
and is addressed in a subsequent chapter
to test the first two questions the
committee investigated a representative
spectrum of recent events some involved
war some involved law enforcement some
involved American lives overseas some
involved personal freedoms at home all
involved important interests how did
intelligence perform let the events
speak for themselves
one Tet failure to adapt to a new kind
of war war in Vietnam meant that
intelligence had to adapt to an
unconventional war and true perception
could spell life or death for Americans
and Tet perceptions were shattered
taking advantage of the Vietnamese Lunar
holiday the North Vietnamese and Viet
Cong forces launched an all-out
offensive On January 30th 1968 against
virtually every urban center and base in
South Vietnam the scale of attacks was
unprecedented in the history of American
involvement in the Vietnam War and
flatly challenged the reassuring picture
into
officials in Saigon and Washington had
helped present to the American people
with nearly all provincial capitals
under siege the American Embassy
compound was penetrated by the Viet Cong
and the pacification program setback in
all areas predictions of successes
announced scant months before had turned
into one of the greatest misjudgments of
the war the committee's investigation of
tet focused on the question of warning
in a combat situation and communicating
the realities of a guerrilla war to
executive branch policymakers both are
interrelated mister William Colby and
the post-mortems certified quote warning
of the Tet Offensive had not fully
anticipated the intensity coordination
and timing of the enemy attack end quote
a chief cause was our degraded image of
the enemy Hey the order of battle
controversy according to mr. Colby the
CIA had been suspicious of ma Seavey's
numerical estimate of the Vietnamese
enemy since at least mid 1966 at an
order of battle conference held in
Saigon in September 1967 the differences
between Washington and the field and
between CIA and MACV were thrashed out
but according to mr. Colby to neither
satisfaction a resulting compromise
represented the best resolution of ma
Seavey's preoccupation with viewing the
order of battle in the classic military
sense and CIA's assessment of enemy
capabilities as much broader People's
War the Special National Intelligence
Estimate that emerged from this
conference quantified the order of
battle in MACV terms and merely
described other potential enemy forces
categories now dropped from previous
estimates of order of battle totaled as
much as 200,000 irregular personnel
self-defense and secret self-defense
forces and assault youth and political
cadre as foot soldiers realized
the time and as recent studies by the
Army Surgeon General confirm the
destructiveness of mines and booby traps
which irregular forces set out was
increasingly responsible for American
losses this was primarily because
American forces were engaging the enemy
with increased frequency in his
defensive positions documents indicate
that even during the order of battle
conference there was a large increase in
sabotage for which irregular xand
civilians were responsible it appears
clear in retrospect that given the
nature of protracted guerrilla war
irregular forces were basic determinants
of the nature and scope of combat the
numbers game not only diverted a direct
confrontation with the realities of war
in Vietnam but also prevented the
intelligence community perhaps the
President and certainly members of
Congress from judging the real changes
in Vietnam over time the Saigon order of
battle conference dropped numbers that
had been used since 1962 and used those
that were left and what appears to have
been an arbitrary attempt to maintain
some ceiling it prompted Secretary of
State Dean Rusk to cable the American
Embassy in Saigon on October 21st 1967
quote need your recommendation how to
resolve problem of unknown percentage of
enemy ki a killed in action and WI a
wounded in action which comes from ranks
of self-defense assault youth and VC
civilian supporters since these others
not carried as part of VC strength
indicators of attrition could be
misleading end quote
when the systems analysis office in the
Department of Defense examined the
results of the conference and
reinterpreted them in terms consistent
with prior quantification it remarked
that the new estimate should have been
three hundred ninety five thousand to
four hundred eighty thousand if computed
on the same basis as before quote the
computations do not show that enemy
strength is increased but
that previous estimates of enemy
strength were too low end quote in the
context of the late 1960s numbers were
not at all an academic exercise
mr. Colby has testified that quote the
effort to develop a number with respect
to the enemy strength was a part of the
advising of our government as to the
amount of effort we would have to spend
to counter that kind of guerilla effort
by the Vietcong end quote they were also
used to inform members of Congress and
the American public on the progress in
Vietnam the validity of most of the
numbers was significantly dubious
unfortunately they were relied on for
optimistic presentations for example
while mentioning in parenthetical and
classified comments that the numbers
supporting its indicators of progress in
Vietnam were suspect the bureau of
intelligence and research provided
Assistant Secretary of State William
Monday with quantified measures of
success general Westmoreland used such
figures to support his contentions in
the fall of 1967 that the enemy's quote
guerrilla force is declining at a steady
rate end quote and testimony before this
committee mr. Colby has stated that the
infatuation with numbers was quote one
of the more trying experiences the
intelligence community has had to endure
end quote in the context of the period
it appears that considerable pressure
was placed on the intelligence community
to generate numbers less out of tactical
necessity than for political purposes
the administration's need was for
confirmation of the contention that
there was light at the end of the tunnel
that the pacification program was
working and generally that American
involvement in Vietnam was not only
correct but effective in this sense the
intelligence community could not help
but find its powers to affect objective
analysis substantially undermined
whether this was by conspiracy or not is
somewhat irrelevant be
consequences for months after the Saigon
order of battle conference the Tet
Offensive began on February 1st hours
after the initial mass assaults
general Westmoreland explained to a
press conference quote I'm Frank to
admit I don't know he the enemy would do
it on the occasion of Ted itself I
thought he would do it before or after
end quote
the u.s. naval officer in command of the
river forces in the Mekong Delta and his
army counterpart were similarly caught
off guard appalled at how poorly
positioned they were to provide quick
and efficient response the naval officer
now a retired Vice Admiral has told the
committee that he quote well remembers
the words of the army general who
brought us the orders to extricate
ourselves from the mudflats as fast as
possible they were it's Pearl Harbor all
over again
end quote the April 1968 postmortem done
by a collection of intelligence officers
discussed the general question of
warning it concluded that while units in
one core area were on alert Allied
forces throughout the country generally
were caught unprepared for what was
unfolding certain forces even while
quote on a higher than normal state of
alert end quote were postured to meet
quote inevitable ceasefire violations
rather than attacks on the cities end
quote in other areas quote the nature
and extent of the enemy's attacks were
almost totally unexpected end quote one
half of the South Vietnamese army was on
leave at the time of the attacks
observing a 36-hour stand down in
testimony before this committee both
general Graham and William Colby
confirmed the fact of some amount of
surprise General Graham preferred to
label it surprise at the enemy's
rashness mr. Colby spoke of a
misjudgment of their potential intensity
coordination and timing
even though quick corrective action was
taken to salvage American equipment and
protect us personnel the ultimate
ramifications on political and military
fronts were considerable general
westmoreland requested a dramatic
increase of two hundred six thousand in
u.s. troop strength and additional
equipment supplies Secretary of Defense
Clark Clifford began rethinking the
substance of intelligence a collection
of intelligence officers finally briefed
the President of the United States on
the realities of the Vietnam War in
mid-march
and a few days later he announced he
would not seek re-election see the
aftermath the committee received
testimony that problems with
intelligence in Vietnam were not
confined to Tet up to the last days of
South Vietnam's existence certain
blinders prevented objective reporting
from the field and an accurate
assessment of the field situation by
Washington Tet raised the issue of
whether American intelligence could
effectively account for enemy strength
later events among them the collapse of
the Saigon government pointed to a
failure to properly acknowledge
weaknesses of allies a real attempt to
address the shortcomings of friendly
forces in Vietnam was hampered by many
factors during the time of massive
American presence there was a failure to
attribute at least partial South
Vietnamese success to American air power
and logistic support consequently
projected ARVN performance in 1975 after
the u.s. pullout was measured against
the yardstick of the Easter offensive of
1972 when American support was crucial
mission restrictions curtailed necessary
collection activity be professional
intelligence officers and forced
reliance on officials charged with
military aid responsibilities this
promoted biased interpretations the sum
total of restrictions manipulations and
censorship no doubt led to the
conclusion Secretary of Defense James R
Schlesinger reached at an April 1975
news conference he pointed out that
quote
the strength resiliency and
steadfastness of those forces South
Vietnamese were more highly valued than
they should have been so that the miss
estimate
I think applied largely to Saigon
capabilities rather than Hanoi Xin
tensions end quote
ultimately the Vietnam intelligence
experience is a sobering reminder of the
limitations and pitfalls the United
States can expect to encounter if it
chooses to align itself an
unconventional battle with
unconventional allies it illustrates how
very different guerrilla war is from
World War two and how much more
problematic an alliance with emerging
and unstable third world governments
will be reviewing the American
experience in Indochina an assistant
secretary of defense for intelligence
wrote a note of caution to the Secretary
of Defense emphasizing the following
view quote the problems that occurred in
Vietnam or Cambodia can now be occurring
in our efforts to assess an Allied and
an adversary third world countries
forces forces in the Persian Gulf War
forces in the Middle East these problems
must be addressed before the u.s.
becomes involved in any future crisis in
the third world that requires objective
and timely intelligence analysis end
quote
given the substantial American
involvement in these areas strong
remedies and honest retrospect appear
necessary to overcome and prevent
intelligence output that fails for
whatever reason to present comprehensive
and undisguised perceptions of war to
Czechoslovakia failure of tactical
warning the Czechoslovakia crisis
challenged our ability to monitor an
attack by the Soviet Union our prime
military adversary we lost the Russian
army for two weeks forces of the Warsaw
Pact invaded Czechoslovakia on August
20th 1968 to overthrow the do Czech
regime which since spring had been
moving toward liberal independent
policies the Soviet
could not tolerate US intelligence had
understood and reported the basic issues
in the developing Soviet Czech
confrontation and concluded that the
Soviets were capable of launching an
invasion at any time
intelligence failed however to provide a
warning that the Soviets had decided to
intervene with force consequently
President Johnson first learned of the
invasion when Soviet ambassador Dobrynin
visited the White House and told him a
review of US intelligence performance
during the Czech crisis indicates the
agencies were not up to the difficult
task of divining Soviet intentions we
knew Soviet capabilities and that the
tactical decision to invade might leave
only hours of advance warning the CIA
dia and NSA should have been prepared
for lightning quick reaction to Soviet
military moves Czech radio broadcasted
news of the invasion at 8:50 p.m.
Washington time CIA translated and
transmitted its reports of invasion to
Washington at 9:15 p.m. by that time
President Johnson had already met his
appointment with the Soviet ambassador
u.s. technical intelligence learned of
the Soviet invasion several hours before
but the information did not reach
Washington until after the Czech radio
message the CIA later concluded that the
information might have made a difference
in our ability to provide the tactical
warning one alarming failure of
intelligence prior to the invasion
occurred during the first two weeks in
August when US intelligence could not
locate a Soviet combat formation which
had moved into northern Poland director
Helms later admitted he was not quote
happy about those two weeks end quote
when he could not locate the Soviet
troops information from technical
intelligence which would have been
helpful was not available until days
later clandestine reporting in the
previous weeks had been so slow to
arrive it proved of little value to
current intelligence publications
Director of Central Intelligence Richard
Helms reported to the president's
foreign intelligence record of failing
to detect the actual attack de-stresses
me the director provided reassurances
that the record would have been better
quote if West Germany had been the
target rather than Czechoslovakia
end quote in 1971 a Presidential
Commission reported to President Nixon
that its review of u.s. ability to
respond to sudden attack had found
serious weaknesses the Pentagon was
directed to improve its warning system
improvement to the very best possible
degree is of course the minimum
acceptable standard there will be no
more important area for congressional
oversight committees to explore
thoroughly three the Mideast war the
system breaks down the Mideast war gave
the intelligence community a real test
of how it can perform when all its best
technology and human skills are focused
on a known world hotspot had failed on
October 6th 1973 Egypt and Syria
launched a major assault across the Suez
Canal and Golan Heights against a
stunned Israel although Israel
eventually repelled the attack at a cost
of thousands of lives the Wars
consequences cannot be measured in
purely military terms for Americans the
subsequent us-soviet confrontation of
October 24th and 25th 1975 when the
Soviets threatened to unilaterally
intervene in the conflict and the Arab
oil embargo are reminders that war in
the Middle East has a direct impact on
our own national interests
the committee's analysis of the US
intelligence performance in this crisis
confirms the judgment of an intelligence
community post-mortem that quote the
principal conclusions concerning the
imminence of hostilities were quite
simply obviously and starkly wrong end
quote even after the conflict had begun
we did not accurately monitor the course
of events
the important question is what went
wrong the last relevant National
Intelligence Estimate before the october
war was published five months earlier in
May 1973 during a particularly bad
period in arab-israeli relations that
estimate addressed the likelihood of war
quote in the next few weeks end quote
no long-range view was presented and the
crisis soon passed the only intelligence
report concerned with future political
military issues was a May 31st 1973
Bureau of intelligence and research INR
memorandum to Secretary of State Rodgers
the authors reasoned correctly that
Egypt's president Sadat for political
reasons would be strongly tempted to
resort to arms if diplomacy proved
fruitless accordingly the report
concluded the quote resumption of
hostilities by autumn will become a
better than even bet end quote
should the diplomatic impasse continue
by September 30th 1975 less than a week
before the attack INR had lost quote the
wisdom of the spring end quote by then
all US intelligence agencies argued that
the political climate and the Arab
nations was not conducive to a major war
intelligence consumers were reassured
that hostilities were not likely the
next question is why this happened
analytical bias was part of the problem
in the summer of 1973 the Defense
Intelligence Agency dia CIA and INR all
flatly asserted that Egypt was not
capable of a major assault across the
Suez Canal Syria they said was not much
of a threat either despite recent
acquisitions of sophisticated Soviet si6
and sa-7 missile systems and other
material one reason for the analysts
optimism can be found in a 1971 CIA
handbook and a passage reiterated and
reinforced
and discussions in early October 1973
the Arab fighting main it reported quote
lacks the necessary physical and
cultural qualities for performing
effective military services end quote
the Arabs were thought to be so clearly
inferior that another attack would be
irrational and thus out of the question
no doubt this attitude was not far in
the background when CIA advised dr.
Kissinger on September 30th 1975 that
quote the whole thrust of President
Sadat's activities since last spring has
been in direction of bringing moral
political and economic force to bear on
Israel an tacit acknowledgment of Arab
unread enos to make war end quote
that analysis is quite surprising in
light of information acquired during
that period which indicated that
imminent war was distinct possibility by
late September for example CIA had
acquired vital evidence of the timing
and warlike intentions of the Arabs the
source was disbelieved for reasons still
unclear there were other positive
indications in late September the
National Security Agency began picking
up clear sign that Egypt and Syria were
preparing for a major offensive NSA
information indicated that a major
foreign nation had become extremely
sensitive to the prospect of war and
concerned about their citizens and
dependents in Egypt NSA's warnings
escaped the serious attention of most
intelligence analysts responsible for
the Middle East the fault may well lie
in the system itself NSA intercepts of
Egyptian Syrian war preparations in this
period were so voluminous an average of
hundreds of reports each week that few
analysts had time to digest more than a
small portion of them even fewer
analysts were qualified by technical
training to read raw NSA traffic costly
intercepts had scant impact on estimates
these reports lacked visibility and
prestige to such a degree that when two
days before the war an NSA briefer
insisted to General Daniel Graham of CIA
that unusual Arab movements suggested
imminent hostilities Graham retorted
that his staff had reported a ho-hum day
in the Middle East later a key military
analyst claimed that if he had only seen
certain NSA reports which were so
sensitive they had not been disseminated
until after the war began he would have
forecast hostilities there was testimony
that dr. Kissinger's secrecy may also
have thwarted effective intelligence
analysis Kissinger had been in close
contact with both the Soviets and the
Arabs throughout the pre-war period he
presumably was in a unique position to
pick up indications of Arab
dissatisfaction with diplomatic talks
and signs of an ever increasing Soviet
belief that war would soon break out
when the committee was denied its
request for high-level reports it was
unable to learn whether kissing her
elicited disinformation in any usable
form it is clear however that the
secretary passed knows such warnings to
the intelligence community the committee
was told by hi US intelligence officials
and policy makers that information from
high-level diplomatic contacts is of
great intelligence value as an often
reliable indicator of both capabilities
and intentions despite the obvious
usefulness of this information dr.
Kissinger has continued to deny
intelligence officials access to notes
of his talks with foreign leaders the
morning of the Arab attack the Watch
Committee which is responsible for
crisis alerts met to assess the
likelihood of major hostilities it
concluded that no major coordinated
offensive was in the offing perhaps one
of the reasons for this was that some
participants were not cleared for all
intelligence data so the subject and its
implications could not be fully
discussed
the entire system had malfunctioned
massive amounts of data had proven
indigestible by analysts analysts
reluctant to raise false alarms and
lulled by anti era biases ignored clear
warnings top-level policymakers declined
to share perceptions gained from talks
with key Arab and Soviet diplomats
during the critical period the fact that
Israeli intelligence to which the u.s.
often deferred in this period had been
wrong was small consolation performance
did not measurably improve after the
wars outbreak when the full resources of
the US intelligence community were
focused on the Middle East the Defense
Intelligence Agency having no military
contingency plan for the area proved
unable to deal with a deluge of reports
from the war zone and quickly found
itself in chaos CIA and INR also
engulfed Washington and each other with
situation reports notable for their
redundancy technical intelligence
gathering was untimely as well as
indiscriminate US National Technical
means of overhead coverage of the Middle
East according to the post-mortem was of
no practical value because of time
problems to over flight reconnaissance
missions on October 13th and 25th quote
straddled the most critical phase of the
war and were therefore of little use end
quote
the u.s. failure to accurately track war
developments may have contributed to a
u.s. Soviet confrontation and troop
alert called by President Nixon on
October 24th 1973 a second intelligence
community postmortem the existence of
which was not disclosed to the committee
until after its hearing reported that
CIA and DIA almost unquestioningly
relied on overly optimistic Israeli
battle reports
thus mislead the u.s. clashed with the
better informed Soviets on the latter's
strong reaction to Israeli ceasefire
violations
Soviet threats to intervene militarily
were met with a worldwide US troop alert
poor intelligence had brought America to
the brink of war administration
witnesses assured the committee that
analysts who had performed poorly during
the crisis had been replaced the broader
record suggests however that the
intelligence system faults have survived
largely intact new analysts will
continue to find themselves harassed and
deluged with largely equivocal
unreadable or unusable data from CIA dia
INR and the collection conscious NSA at
the same time they can expect to be cut
off by top-level policymakers from some
of the best indicators of hostile
intentions for Portugal the u.s. caught
napping do our intelligence services
know what is going on beneath the
surface and allied nations that are not
making headlines quiet portugal exploded
in 1974 leaving serious questions in its
aftermath when a group of left-leaning
portuguese junior military officers out
stood the Caetano regime on april 25th
1974 State Department officials
represented to the New York Times that
Washington knew those who were behind
the coup well state indicated that we
were not surprised by the coup and that
no significant changes in Portugal's
NATO membership were expected nothing
could have been further from the truth
the committee has reviewed documents
which show that the US intelligence
community had not even been tasked to
probe deeply into Portugal in the waning
months of the Caetano dictatorship as a
result policymakers were given no real
warning of the timing and probable
ideological consequences of the coup
despite clear and public indications
that a political upheaval was at hand
the State Department's Bureau of
intelligence and research had not
analyzed events in Portugal in the month
before the April coup in retrospect for
warning signals the
in late February and continuing through
mid March 1974 should have sparked quote
speculation at that time that a crisis
of major proportions was brewing end
quote
according to the director of
intelligence and research William Hyland
all four events were reported in the
American press one the publication in
February 1974 of general Antonio D
Spinola 's controversial book
criticizing Portugal's African colonial
wars which unleashed an unprecedented
public storm to the refusal of General
Spinola and the Armed Forces chief of
staff Francisco Costa Gomez to
participate in a demonstration of
military unity and support for the
kitano dictatorship three an abortive
coup in mid-march when an infantry
regiment attempted to march upon Lisbon
this was followed by the subsequent
dismissal of Spinola and Costa Gomez
from their commands for a period of
rising tensions the arrests of leftists
and a purge of military officers
following the first three developments
the intelligence community however was
too preoccupied to closely examine the
Portuguese situation those responsible
for writing current intelligence
publications had deadlines to meet
meetings to attend and relatively little
time to speculate on developments in the
previously sleepy Caetano dictatorship
the committee's investigation indicates
there were other earlier warning signs
which might have sparked some
intelligence interest again these
indications of deeper unrest were not
subjected to close analysis on October
26th 1973 the defense attache in Lisbon
reported to dia headquarters in the
Pentagon rumors of a coup plot and
serious discontent among Portuguese
military officers on November 8th 1973
the anti Shaye reported that 860
portuguese army captains had signed a
petition protest
conditions the attache quickly concluded
these dissidents had no intentions of
revolution nevertheless the fact that
over 800 military officers felt deeply
enough to risk retribution was a good
indication of the profound social
revolution which Portugal faced the
record does not suggest that the anti
che attempted to get to know these
junior officers understand their views
or even record their names nor had
anyone in Washington assigned him the
task of searching for signs of social
and political unrest in the Portuguese
military one reason for this was that
the director of an tache Affairs was not
allowed to assign duties to anti-phase
assignments were done elsewhere in an
unbelievable demonstration of confusing
and inefficient administration also in
November 1973 the attache attended a
social gathering at the home of a
retired American officer where he heard
discussion of right-wing Spanish and
Portuguese counter-coup plans should
extremists overthrow the Caetano
government neither the identities of the
counter plotters nor of the extremists
were reported by the attache
no further reference to this report was
found in a review of subsequent anti che
activities prior to the April coup in
February 1974 the attache forwarded
information from December 1973 on the
Portuguese government response to a
petition of complaints signed by over
1,500 junior military officers there was
no effort to identify the leaders of the
petition campaign or to contact any of
the signers after the coup High CIA
officials would complain of the lack of
in-depth biographic reporting from the
anti che office a review of all defense
attache reports in the months prior to
the coup indicated substantial delays in
forwarding reports to Washington it even
took a month for the anti che to send
Washington the Spinola book which
unleashed the public storm when it was
published in February
twice Defence Intelligence Agency
headquarters in Washington wrote the
attache office in Lisbon urging the six
officers there to be more aggressive to
travel more and frequent the diplomatic
party circuit less only the most junior
attache a Navy lieutenant made an
attempt to probe beyond the obvious the
committee was also told that a serious
problem in dia is a tendency to reward
senior officers nearing the ends of
their careers by assigning them to
attache posts not only were these
officers often untrained and unmotivated
for intelligence duties but the director
of an tache Affairs testified that he
was powerless to assign substantive
duties to the anti-phase in any case the
committee did not have the opportunity
to review raw CIA reports during the six
months prior to the coup CIA officials
who relied on these reports told this
committee that the CIA station in Lisbon
was so small and so dependent upon the
official Portuguese security service for
information that very little was picked
up in fact anti-phase were in a better
position than CIA to get to know the
Portuguese military there is no
indication that anti Shaye's and the
chief of station attempted to pool their
resources and combine CIA's knowledge of
the Portuguese community movement with
anti Shea's supposed military contacts
the national intelligence officer and IO
for Western Europe did attempt an
analysis a draft memorandum on trends in
Portugal titled cracks in the facade had
been in preparation for nearly a month
and was almost complete when the April
coup erupted and had to be retitled the
document itself despite its titles was
not attuned to the real causes of
intense discontent which produced a
leftist military revolt that same
National Intelligence officer testified
that he had some 25 European countries
to monitor with the help of only one
staff assistant
NIOS do not have command authority over
CIA's intelligence or operations
directorates they cannot order that
papers be written but staffers be
detached from the current intelligence
office to work on an in-depth estimate
they cannot instruct clandestine
operations to collect certain types of
information nor will the nio always be
informed of covert actions that may be
underway in one of his countries the
most disturbing testimony before this
committee was official satisfaction with
intelligence prior to the Portuguese
coup the director of an tache Affairs
told the committee that intelligence
performance had been quote generally
satisfactory and responsive to
requirements end quote
the national intelligence officer for
Western Europe said intelligence reports
had described quote a situation clearly
in process of change an old order coming
apart at the seams end quote
however both officials quickly admitted
under questioning that the anti-phase
had not in fact been very aggressive nor
had any intelligence document warned
when and how the old order was quote
coming apart at the seams
and quote without access to intelligence
reports this committee might have
believed official claims that the system
was functioning well v india priorities
lost how well does the US intelligence
keep track of non-military events that
affect our foreign policy interests not
very well if the first nuclear test in
the third world is any indication the
intelligence community estimated in 1965
that India was capable of conducting a
nuclear test and probably would produce
a nuclear device within the next few
years in 1972
a special estimate said the quote
chances are roughly even that India will
conduct a nuclear test at some time in
the next several years and label it a
peaceful explosion end quote
dia and reports distributed only within
the Joint Chiefs of Staff had stated
since 1971 that India might already have
a nuclear device
however when India did explode a nuclear
device on May 18 1974 US intelligence
was caught off guard as the CIA's
postmortem says of the community's
surprise quote this failure denied the
US government the option of considering
diplomatic or other initiatives to try
to prevent this significant step in
nuclear proliferation end quote
only one current intelligence article
was published in the six months before
the may explosion that article by dia
stated for the first time that India
might already possess such a device
perhaps one reason the article did not
provoke more debate and initiative was
the title India a nuclear weapons
program will not likely be pursued in
the near term in 1972 US intelligence
had picked up 26 reports that India
would soon test a device or that she was
capable of doing so if the government
made the decision to proceed there were
only two reports on the subject from
August 1972 to May 1974 when the device
was exploded
neither was pursued with what the CIA
claimed was a real follow up an April 17
1974 report indicated that India might
have already conducted an unsuccessful
nuclear test in the Rajasthan desert the
CIA did not disseminate this report to
other agencies
nor did CIA officials pursue the subject
the director of Central Intelligence had
established the bureaucratic device of
key intelligence question in 1974
although nuclear proliferation was on
the list few officials outside the upper
reaches of the bureaucracy expressed
much interest the CIA's general nuclear
developments priority list did not
address India and the military attachs
received no clear instructions on
clear matters nevertheless previous
estimates on India had identified gaps
in our information after India exploded
the nuclear device in May 1974 director
Colby wrote dr. Kissinger to say he
intended to amount a more aggressive
effort on the nuclear proliferation
problem one of several justifications
for national technical means of overhead
coverage over India in the two years
prior to May 1974 was the nuclear test
issue however the intelligence community
technical analysts were never asked to
interpret the data
the CIA's post mortem stated in effect
the system had been tasked to obtain
data but the analysts had not been asked
to examine such data after the explosion
the analysts were able to identify the
test location from pretest data
following the failure to anticipate
India's test the United States
intelligence board agreed to hold one
committee meeting a year on nuclear
proliferation and her agency
coordinating mechanisms were established
teams of experts traveled to various
countries to impress on American embassy
personnel the importance of the
proliferation threat analysts once again
were encouraged to talk to each other
more the missing element as the
bureaucracy reshuffled its priorities
after the Indian failure is quite simple
the system itself must be reformed to
promote anticipation of rather than
reaction to important world events six
Cyprus failure of intelligence and
policy Cyprus presented a complex mix of
politics personalities and NATO allies
unfortunately a crisis turned to war
while intelligence tried to unravel
events and America offended all
participants on the morning of July 15
1974 Greek strongman general Demetrios
Ione DS and his military forces on
Cyprus overthrew the elected government
of Archbishop Makarios
five days later Turkey invaded the
island ostensibly to protect the Turkish
minority there and to prevent the Greek
annexation long promoted by the new
Cyprus leadership unsatisfied with its
initial military success turkey renewed
its offensive on August 14 1974 the
failure of US intelligence to forecast
the coup despite strong strategic and
tactical signs may be attributed to
several factors poor reporting from the
US Embassy in Athens in part due to
CIA's exclusive access to I&E DS the
general analytical assumption of
rational behavior analysts reluctance to
raise false claims of an impending
crisis the failure to predict the coup
is puzzling in view of the abundance of
strategic warnings when I&E DS rested
power from george papadapolis in
november 1974 analysts concluded that
relations between Greece and macario's
were destined to worsen Iowan Edie's
hatred of macario's whom he considered
pro-communist or worse has been
described as having bordered on
pathological
moreover macario's was seen as a
stumbling block to IANA T's hopes for
enosis observers agreed that a serious
conflict was only a matter of time by
spring of 1974 a confrontation would at
times appear imminent with intervening
lols each trip to the brink elicited
dire warnings to policy officials from
Near East
desks in the State Department however
the nuances of these events indicating a
gathering of storm clouds were largely
lost on analysts as their attention
remained focused on the Greek Turkish
clash over mineral rights in the Aegean
Cyprus remained a side issue despite
growing evidence that the IANA T's
macario's relationship was reaching a
critical stage there would soon be
several tactical indications that a coup
was in the works On June 7 1974 the
National Intelligence Daily warned that
Ione DS was actively
considering the ouster of macario's if
the archbishop made and quote extremely
provocative move end quote
On June 29th intelligence officials
reported that I&E DS had again told his
CIA contact nine days before that if
macario's continued his provocation the
Greek would have only two options to
write off Cyprus with its sizable Greek
majority or eliminate the archbishop as
a factor on July 3rd 1974 macario's made
that quote extremely provocative move
and quote by demanding the immediate
withdrawal of a Greek National Guard
contingent on Cyprus the ultimatum was
delivered in an extraordinary open
letter to the Greek government accusing
Ayane teases associates of attempting
his physical as well as political
liquidation On June 29 1974 secretary
Kissinger responding to alarms sounded
by State Department desk officers
approved to cable to US ambassador Henry
J Tosca in Athens instructing that he
personally tell Ayane DS of u.s.
opposition to any adventure on Cyprus
the instruction was only partially
heeded Tasca assured by the CIA station
chief that I&E d's would continue to
deal only with CIA and not sharing the
State Department desk officers alarm was
content to pass a message to the Greek
leader indirectly tasks his colleagues
subsequently persuaded secretary
Kissinger
top aide Joseph Sisko that a general
message passed through regular
government channels would have
sufficient impact the Ambassador told
committee staff that Sisko agreed it was
unnecessary for Tasca himself to
approach Ayane DS who had no official
government position that interpretation
has been vigorously disputed it is clear
however that the embassy took no steps
to underscore for IEDs the depth of u.s.
concern over a possible Cyprus coup
attempt this
episode the exclusive CIA access to I&E
DS tasks 'as indications that he may not
have seen all important messages to and
from the CIA station
I&E teases suggestions of u.s.
acquiescence and washington's well-known
coolness to macario's have led to public
speculation that either US officials
were inattentive to the reports of the
developing crisis or simply allowed it
to happen
by not strongly directly and
unequivocally warning I&E DS against it
due to State Department access policies
the committee was unsuccessful in
obtaining closely held cables to and
from the Secretary of State during this
period including a message the secretary
sent to I&E DS through the CIA the day
after the coup accordingly it is
impossible to reach a definitive
conclusion on July 3rd 1974 a CIA report
stated that an individual later
described as quote an untested source
end quote had passed the word that
despite new aggressiveness on macario's
as part I uh need ease had changed his
mind there would be no coup after all
for reasons still unclear this CIA
report was embraced and heeded until
July 15th the day of the coup the
intelligence community postmortem
appears to have concluded that the tip
was probably a ruse I&E teases dubious
change of heart went virtually
unquestioned despite Macari OSes open
letter
despite further ultimatums from the
archbishop to remove the greek officers
and despite the and mass resignations of
three high-level greek foreign ministry
officials known to be soft liners on
cyprus in this setting the grotesquely
erroneous national intelligence bulletin
of july 15 1974 is not surprising nor
our ambassador Tosca's protestations
that he saw no coup on the horizon
almost at the moment aiya needies
unleashed his forces a national
intelligence bulletin was reassuring
intelligence consumers with the headline
I&E DS is taking a moderate line while
he plays for time in his dispute with
Archbishop Makarios results of the
events triggered by the coup included
thousands of Cypriot casualties and
refugees a narrowly averted war between
NATO allies Greece and Turkey
a tragic worsening of US relations with
all three nations and the death of an
American ambassador US intelligence must
be accorded a share of the
responsibility the intelligence
community somewhat generously termed its
performance during the Cyprus crisis as
quote a mixture of strengths and
weaknesses end quote
the committee's conclusion after an
analysis of the record is less sanguine
intelligence clearly failed to provide
adequate warning of the coup and it
performed indifferently once the crisis
had begun the analytical failure in the
Cyprus crisis brings to mind several
parallels with the 1973 Middle East
debacle in both cases analysts and
policy makers were afflicted both with a
past history of false alarms and with
the rigid notion unsupported in fact
that foreign leaders invariably
act rationally in the Cyprus crisis has
in the Mideast analysts were deluged
with unreadable and redundant data
subsequent to the initial intelligence
failure still given the ample
indications that macario's had
sufficiently aroused
Anita's desire these analytical quirks
should not have prevented a correct
interpretation of events these appear to
have been collection failures in this
period although additional evidence
could probably not have overcome the
analytical deficiencies that caused
erroneous conclusions for example CIA
personnel had been instructed by the US
ambassador not to establish contacts
within the Turkish minority and to
obviate any allegations of
eugen with the anti Macario co kab
movement they were told to seek
intelligence on a oka b by indirect
means rather than through direct contact
with members of that organization
finally signals show intelligence in the
area was focused elsewhere and even
after the coup was not a significant
factor since the coup inevitably led to
the two turkish invasions and the greek
turkish confrontation the performance of
intelligence in predicting military
hostilities after the coup is both less
important and unremarkable in its
successes along with most newspaper
articles of the time US intelligence
concluded that aya need eases
installation of nikos sampson
notoriously anti Turk as Cypriot
president ensured a Turkish invasion of
the island
despite prominent stories in Turkish
newspapers and undisguised troop
movements at the coast
dia did not predict the invasion until
literally hours before Turkish forces
hit the beaches on July 20th 1974 a
national intelligence officers report
had picked July 20th as a likely
invasion date but was never disseminated
to the intelligence community
perhaps flushed by its success and
calling the first Turkish invasion
just after Turkish press did US
intelligence appeared to lose interest
in the belief that the crisis was over
thus there was no real forewarning that
the Turkish forces would launch an even
more ambitious invasion on August 14th
resulting in the capture of fully
one-third of the island in terms of both
its immediate and long-range
consequences the sum total of US
intelligence failure during the Cyprus
crisis may have been the most damaging
intelligence performance in recent years
seven domestic internal security and
counter counter intelligence the
intelligence division of the FBI is
divided into two sections internal
security and counterintelligence the
internal
Security Division investigates domestic
subversion or extremist groups with the
goal of ascertaining whether individuals
are violating federal laws or may
violate them in the future these
investigations are costly in monetary
terms and in terms of personal privacy
are they effectively and dispassionately
controlled in keeping with criminal
priorities are they efficiently
terminated when clearly unproductive 34
years of investigating the Socialist
Workers Party and over five years spying
on the Institute for Policy Studies
provides some examples of disturbing
answers a Institute for Policy Studies
the FBI manual of instructions allows
preliminary investigations to be opened
on groups espousing extremist
philosophies
if these investigations did not
demonstrate reasonable likelihood of
uncovering criminal violations the
manual states that they should be
terminated within 90 days in 1968 the
FBI saw sufficient connection between
the Institute for Policy Studies IPS and
the students for a Democratic Society
SDS to open a preliminary investigation
of IPS the investigation was not
terminated after an initial 90-day
period even though it had turned up no
evidence that IPS members or their
associates were violating federal laws
six months later at the end of a
vigorous nine month investigation of IPS
the Washington field office reported the
results as negative the IPS
investigation was destined to continue
for five more years the investigation
had been based on an SDS connection
during the investigation however FBI had
received information from a source
advising quote that in general the IPS
is not well thought of by the hardcore
SDS leaders because members of the IPS
are not activists end quote
except for one IPS leader considered
sympathetic with SDS objectives
the FBI was not discouraged by the loss
of its investigative base and went ahead
reporting unrelated matters one report
for example described IPS as quote a
non-profit non-taxable Institute which
studies programs to present policies end
quote
the same report noted the fact that
quote IPS educational curriculum centers
on topics which are critical of the
present u.s. system end quote
in January 1971 the bureau continued
reporting non criminal matters such as
the fact that the Institute quote though
small exerts considerable influence
through contacts with educators Congress
and labor end quote
it is important to remember that the
whole probe began with an investigation
of alleged contacts between one I P s
staffer and an SDS leader the FBI had
effectively reversed the traditional
concept of guilt by association instead
of a suspect group tainting an
individual the individual had tainted
the group in October 1971 Bureau report
said of the Institute the popular
impression of IPS as the think-tank of
radical United States politics is
justified it has taken and continues to
take a major role in the anti-war
movement and calls for disarmament while
IPS people see themselves as leaders of
radical thought they would appear to be
leaders without a popular constituency
the same report concentrated on IPS
suspicions of FBI surveillance it stated
that quote they suspect that they are
being watched from the building across
the street and from adjacent buildings
end quote
the same report went on to say that two
members of the Institute had been quote
observed by a representative of the FBI
walking slowly around the block of IPs
sometimes several times conversing with
each other they appear to be conversing
in low tones and in a guarded manner end
quote
in August 1972 an alert Bureau agent
collected some IPS garbage the trash
revealed no evidence of criminal conduct
however eight used typewriter ribbons
were found even though there were no
signs of crimes and despite the fact
that IPS itself was not suspected of
crimes FBI devoted time and money to the
expensive process of reconstructing the
documents that had been typed by the
ribbon part of the yield was intimate
sexual gossip FBI officials told
committee staff under oath that personal
information such as sexual activities is
discarded if it does not bear on a crime
that was not true information from the
trash retrieval including the sexual
gossip was incorporated into a number of
reports and each report the information
was attributed to a quote source who has
supplied reliable information in the
past end quote
in 1973 the Washington field office
reported that quote the organization IPS
is fragmented into a wide variety of
studies and interests the vast majority
of which appear to be within legal
limits end quote
in May 1974 the Washington field office
concluded that a quote paucity of
information exists that would support
the likelihood of IPS or its leaders to
be functioning in violation of federal
law end quote
only then after five years and no
evidence of law breaking did the
investigation become inactive
you
Socialist Workers Party the second
example involved the Socialist Workers
Party swp the swp adopted a declaration
of principles and a constitution at
their founding convention in January
1938 the Declaration of Principles was
replete with revolutionary rhetoric of
the Marxist left the fledgling Socialist
Workers Party also swore allegiance to
the worldwide organization of Trotsky
the Fourth International nevertheless
the swp dissolved their allegiance with
the Fourth International and retracted
this Declaration of Principles on
December 21st 1940 in order to comply
with the Voorhis Act the FBI maintained
that this disassociation with the Fourth
International was merely cosmetic
however the FBI has been unable to prove
any illegal relationship between the swp
and the Fourth International FBI's
failure to uncover illegal activity by
this political party is not from lack of
effort swp has been subjected to 34
years of intensive investigation on
November 5th 1975 FBI officials
testified that the Fourth International
itself was a body made up of Marxist
elements around the world and enjoyed no
structural power base in the Soviet
Union significantly these officials
demonstrated no detailed knowledge about
the Fourth International FBI officials
did not mention the fact that the
Socialist Workers are a legitimate
American political party that even runs
a candidate for president equally as
important
the FBI has found no evidence to support
a federal prosecution of an swp member
with the exception of several Smith Act
violations in 1941 since that time not
only have there been no further
prosecutions against the swp for any
federal offense
but the portions of the Smith act under
which these earlier convictions had been
obtained have been declared
unconstitutional the investigation which
FBI officials tacitly admit has been
conducted partially under the aegis of
an
prosecutable statute has revealed that
the swp is a highly law-abiding group
the swp has even avoided illegal and
potentially violent confrontations with
the authorities during any sort of civil
protests nevertheless this had no impact
on 34 years of unproductive spying
according to the presidential candidate
of the swp peter kamijo party members
are even forbidden by the swp to smoke
marijuana the bureau apparently
formulated a philosophy in this case to
justify their investigation considerable
resources have been allocated to
compound the error of a continuing
unproductive investigation and to
backstop the preconceptions of FBI
personnel for example FBI internal
security investigators committed a
massive manpower allocation of
interviewing landlords employers fellow
employees and family relations of swp
members the FBI also maintained
intensive surveillance of most if not
all of the SW PS 2500 members Americans
are often concerned about privacy
invasions of domestic security
investigations one-fifth of all
investigations initiated by the FBI
during the last dealt with security
matters the important issue is whether
citizens receive a valuable product in
the form of anticipatory intelligence
which would serve as a deterrent - and a
prevention of crime while it is
impossible to accurately gauge the
deterrent effect of FBI efforts it is
obvious that the FBI failed to
anticipate groups dedicated to the
overthrow of the existing government and
fully committed to violence the FBI has
likewise had a dismal record in the
prompt apprehension of fugitives from
the new left underground domestic
intelligence appears to be suffering
from a miss a location of resources and
efforts eight president's foreign
intelligence advisory board
addition to day-to-day bureaucratic
efforts to monitor and to improve
intelligence the executive branch
oversees performance through mechanisms
like the quasi public president's
foreign intelligence advisory board PF
IAB the issue is whether such a
mechanism is viable and effective staff
investigation suggests that reliance on
PF IAB for oversight responsibilities is
totally without merit the board
admittedly part-time meets for one or
two days sessions about six times a year
the Chairman spends about half as time
on PF IAB Affairs only two professional
staff members support the board and both
are detailees from the very intelligence
agencies they are supposed to oversee
the meeting and staff arrangements do
not lend themselves to a responsible
analysis and review of massive and
complex intelligence programs it is said
that from time to time PF IAB submits to
the president useful documents on covert
action and technical collection programs
however the committee denied access to
these and other periodic PF IAB reports
is unable to determine whether the board
has been functioning meaningfully to
important and limiting factors shed
light on the role and performance of the
board the board cannot establish or even
oversee policy but is limited to
advising the president with respect to
objectives and conduct of the Foreign
Intelligence and related activities the
board's effectiveness also is limited by
the interest and confidence of the
president and this has varied
considerably throughout the five
administration's of the board's
existence
the problems do not end there board
members are chosen for distinguished
careers in government academia and the
business world not surprisingly members
of PF IAB whose principal functions
include advice on research and
development goals are typically
affiliated with firms holding lucrative
intelligence and defense contracts there
are no indications that a PF IAB member
has ever improperly profited from his
board service however after searching
board records at the request of
committee staff a PF IAB spokesman
stipulated that there are no conflict of
interest regulations applicable to its
members likewise there were no
regulations covering the expensive and
confidential contracts they assess and
review instead members are provided on
their appointment with the standards of
conduct for the White House staff there
are obviously difficult policy problems
in gathering a group of distinguished
knowledgeable citizens and at the same
time ensuring that the board's
activities and judgments are entirely
beyond reproach
the part-time nature of PF IAB if its
work is recognized as being cursory is
not necessarily undesirable members can
bring a fresh perspective from their
other pursuits and they are less
compromised by the secrecy and insular
views of intelligence agencies on the
other hand heavy reliance on this board
for oversight without more outside
professional staff and greater
presidential commitment is an illusion 9
National Security Council Intelligence
Committee confusion and indifference are
often the rule in executive branch
efforts to manage the intelligence
community's performance a good
illustration is the National Security
Council Intelligence Committee and its
economic intelligence subcommittee
created by President Nixon in a November
5th 1971 memorandum entitled
organization and management of the u.s.
foreign intelligence community NS CIC
was design
as a forum for high-level consumers of
intelligence to articulate their needs
the economic subcommittee was created in
late 1974 to provide a similar
lower-level forum for input on economic
intelligence there has been little
commitment to these mechanisms on the
part of the white house or the consumers
for which they were intended real doubt
exists as to the desirability of their
continued existence the intelligence
community has met only twice in four
years it met once in December 1971 to
organize and once in August 1974 to
reorganize it has no permanent staff
other than the NSC Director for
intelligence coordination Richard over a
CI a detailee
and architect of the controversial Kaos
program there is no indication that the
committee has been effective a working
group is composed of the next lower
level of consumers although in existence
from 1971 to 1974 it apparently did not
perform any useful function this group
was revived following the 1974
Intelligence Committee meeting and met
seven times thereafter while working
group principles assert a need for
intelligence consumers to somehow
institutionally convey their problems to
collectors there appears to be a general
low level of interest on the part of
several members and misgivings as to the
effectiveness of the panel as presently
constituted the economic intelligence
subcommittees performance to date can be
easily evaluated while its purpose to
provide consumers of economic
intelligence a forum to convey their
needs appears worthwhile on paper it has
produced no results one meeting was held
in May 1975 at the behest of the DCI the
chairman assistant secretary of the
Treasury for international affairs told
committee staff that as a consumer he
was generally satisfied with
intelligence input that the group was a
waste of time and
that he intended to hold as few meetings
as possible displaying an attitude rare
among government officials the Chairman
disdained formal high-level committees
and called for informal communication at
the working level he has since left his
post and may well be replaced by a
proponent of bureaucratic committees
nonetheless the record strongly calls
for an abolition of the subcommittee as
presently operated and tasked 10 the
management and production of Defense
Intelligence the Deputy Secretary of
Defense recently expressed frustration
at the apparent inability of a
multi-billion dollar US intelligence
establishment to produce timely and
useful information he reportedly
complained that quote in a mechanical
sense the system produces the
information but it's so damn big and
cumbersome and uncoordinated that you
can't get the information properly
assessed and to the right people and
quote mismanaged and uncoordinated
intelligence operations result in more
than resource wastage during the Mideast
war and Cyprus crisis for example
uncoordinated and duplicative reports
compounded the problem of interpreting
events there is a clear need to
challenge organizational proliferation
duplication of activity and product and
overlapping of management layers that
have plagued Defense Intelligence for
years the significance of these problems
is contained in the fact that the
Department of Defense controls nearly
80% of the intelligence community's
resources and employs nearly 90% of its
personnel particular attention must be
directed toward the Defense Intelligence
Agency dia an organization established
in the early 1960s to integrate and
align defense intelligence activities
and a major production unit in its own
right as chartered dia was to function
as both a supervisor and coordinator and
as a centralized producer of
intelligence over the years however it
became
creasing the apparent that dia could not
accomplish the ambitious management and
production goals envisioned at the time
of its formation a string of overviews
including the 1969 Perrault report the
1970 blue-ribbon defence panel the 1971
Schlesinger study for the Office of
Management and Budget the 1974
management review and the 1975 panel on
intelligence all found that
organizational impediments and product
and perfection have continued to persist
after years of dia operation each intern
recommended reorganization and
substantive improvements none solved the
problems
dia lacks comprehensive authority to
direct and control resources throughout
the Defense Department as initially
envisioned for example the vast
Cryptologic resources in the Armed
Services and the National Security
Agency are not responsive to dia dia z--
resource management functions were taken
over in 1972 by assistant secretary of
defense for intelligence with a broader
mandate to coordinate budgeting the
central problem is bureaucratic politics
the three individual branches of the
military resist any organization which
might curb their authority to direct
programs and allocate resources they
undermine the concept on which dia was
founded by avoiding its authority and
preventing it from obtaining qualified
manpower President Nixon recognized that
dia had not achieved its purpose and
issued a directive on November 5th 1971
charging the DCI with responsibility for
intelligence budget preparation
including the budget for tactical
military intelligence this too failed
since the DCI lacked authority for over
80 percent of the community's budget
which remained in the Department of
Defense the only noticeable effect of
these reforms has been an added layer of
bureaucracy and a confused sharing of
responsibilities the output side of dia
za / ation has been courtesy
from a number of directions over the
years
neither the Secretary of Defense nor the
Armed Services have been completely
satisfied with dia product Secretary of
Defense McNamara reportedly preferred
CIA's product the services prefer their
own analysis their criticisms focus on
dia scre n't intelligence and its
estimates they raise questions as to dia
x' capability to produce unique and
quality intelligence to meet tactical
and national demands an internal Defense
Department memorandum to the Deputy
Secretary of Defense in January 1974
indicated the scope of dia inadequacy in
light of the Mideast war failures the
memorandum concluded quote what has been
stated briefly are only the symptoms of
the disease the cause lies deeper end
quote while noting the failure of dia
analysts to predict the war the memo
stated quote the blame is not theirs
alone it is a corporate failure a
chronic unsoundness of the entire dia
mechanism unless we make the required
changes in organization procedures and
personnel we are going to reap another
intelligence failure and the next one
could be a disaster involving u.s.
forces end quote while several of the
root causes of poor performance provide
an argument for piecemeal reform in
general the problems are too permanent
to allow for anything less than
across-the-board changes a major
obstacle to strong analytic capability
within dia results from the civilian
military nature of dia in a setting of
independent military establishments as
long as the service branches retain
viable intelligence units dia remains an
unattractive assignment and will not
attract qualified officers in addition
manpower reductions have spread
available personnel too thin for
effective reporting
civilians in DIA are confronted with two
disincentives dia cannot compete with
CIA and NSA in appointments and
promotions and persistent military
control of higher grade management
positions limits mobility officials
within dia are ready to admit they
cannot match CIA they justify their
contribution as that of devil's
advocates or honest brokers even in
military intelligence the committee was
told quote they CIA are at least our
equals end quote
meaning that dia was no real improvement
over CIA intelligence in summary
finished intelligence generated by dia
has repeatedly failed to meet consumer
needs the evidence suggests that dia
does not fulfill the ambitious
expectations of the early 1960s it is
duplicative expensive unattractive and
its production capabilities are
handicapped by the consistent weaknesses
of its own organization
[Music]
this is our hidden history
you